---
layout: post
title: Non-disclosure; American colonies 
---

This morning I was listening to the [latest podcast](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) from the excellent Planet Money team. They were looking into the history of non-disclosure agreements, in particular how they came to be used to gag whistle-blowers from revealing misconduct, corruption, discrimination, and harassment. 

They contrasted this relatively new role with the seemingly innocuous, indeed reasonable, use to prevent employees of corporations from revealing secrets. 

It occurs to me that this must also be a relatively new phenomenon. In the past, people learned a trade through apprenticeship, and employers could lose the skills that had accumulated in their employees if they risked losing them to other firms. 

Now, the ‘secrets’, most if not all of which will have been generated by the employees themselves (whoever heard of a shareholder fixing a software bug or suggesting a new product feature?) can be owned by the employers, preventing the employees from embodying the intellectual capital that they are accumulating — indeed creating — in their own minds. 

Non-disclosure agreements are a land-grab by employers. Denying employees the option to take their ideas elsewhere is like cutting the hands off of the blacksmith, or the eyes out of the portrait painter. 

* * *

How would the creation of America be viewed through modern eyes? Even Americans would surely oppose British imperialism, and the audacity of landing on and claiming a small part of an inhabited continent. Despite oppression at home in Europe, we would condemn settlers who chose other people’s land as the setting for their own states of religious (un-) freedom. And, when the British were thrown off, we would be horrified by the expansion from the original thirteen colonies, perched on the east coast, westward to the other ‘shining sea’. (Compare the 1,080,465 km² United States at independence* with the 9,841,955 km² country now -- a 9 times increase.) 

The people who were there before might not have had big cities, or spent much time writing down what they had been doing. They had a negligible footprint on the vast continent. In 200 years, with more than a little help from the people who displaced them, the environment is breaking. I don’t think that it is a coincidence that the abhorrent actions that led to the creation of the United States involved replacing a culture that was in harmony with the environment with one that depletes it. 

* N.B. tellingly, it is almost impossible to find a figure for the size of the thirteen colonies on the internet -- Google it. The figure I found is from [_A Century of Population Growth. From the First to the Twelfth Census of the United States: 1790-1900._ Washington D.C. 1909, Table 10, p. 56.](https://archive.org/details/centuryofpopulat00unit)